[IMP] misc: import export rewrite (#7762)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/general/export_import_data.rst

Export and import data
======================

In Odoo, it is sometimes necessary to export or import data for running reports or for data
modification. This document will cover the export and import of data into and out of Odoo.

.. important::
   Sometimes, users run into a 'time out' error, or a record will not process due to

>    its size. This can occur with large exports or in cases where the import file is too large. To

Reviewer: Early line break

While this behavior might be good and easy in most cases, it is also possible that it goes wrong or
that the column should be mapped to a field that is not proposed by default.

If this happens, check the :guilabel:`Show fields of relation fields (advanced) option`, then a
complete list of fields will be available for each column.

.. image:: export_import_data/field_list.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Searching for the field to match the tax column.

Where can date import format be changed?
----------------------------------------

.. note::
   Odoo can automatically detect if a column is a date, and it will try to guess the date format
   from a set of most commonly used date formats. While this process can work for many date formats,
   some date formats will not be recognized. This can cause confusion due to day-month inversions;
   it is difficult to guess which part of a date format is the day and which part is the month in a
   date such as '01-03-2016'.

When importing a :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file Odoo will provide *Formatting* options.
To view which date format Odoo has found from the file, check the :guilabel:`Date Format` that is

> shown when clicking on options under the file selector. If this format is incorrect, change it to the

Reviewer: Over 100 characters

preferred format using *ISO 8601* to define the format.

.. tip::
   ISO 8601 is an international standard covering the worldwide exchange and communication of date
   and time-related data.

.. important::
   If an Excel (.xls, .xlsx) file is being imported, use date cells to store dates. The display of
   dates in Excel is different from the way they are stored. Storing dates in date cells will ensure
   that the date format is correct in Odoo, whatever locale the date format is in.

Can numbers with currency sign be imported (e.g.: $32.00)?
----------------------------------------------------------

Yes, Odoo fully supports numbers with parenthesis to represent negative sign as well as numbers with
currency sign attached to them. Odoo also automatically detects which thousand/decimal separator is
used. If a currency symbol unknown to Odoo is used, it might not be recognized as a number, and the
import will crash.

.. note::

>    When importing a :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file, the formatting menu will appear on the

Reviewer: over 100 characters

difficult to guess which part of a date format is the day and which part is the month in a date such
as '01-03-2016'.

When importing a :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file Odoo will provide *Fornatting* options.
To view which date format Odoo has found from the file check the :guilabel:`Date Format` that is
shown when clicking on options under the file selector. If this format is incorrect change it to the
preferred format using *ISO 8601* to define the format.

.. tip::
   ISO 8601 is an international standard covering the worldwide exchange and communication of date
   and time-related data.

.. important::
   If an Excel (.xls, .xlsx) file is being imported, use date cells to store dates. The display of
   dates in Excel is different from the way they are stored. By storing dates in date celss this
   will ensure that the date format is correct in Odoo whatever locale date format is in.

Can numbers with currency sign be imported (e.g.: $32.00)?
----------------------------------------------------------

Yes, Odoo fully supports numbers with parenthesis to represent negative sign as well as numbers with

> currency sign attached to them. Odoo also automatically detects which thousand/decimal separator is

Author: Yes this is what () means in spreadsheets. I will clarify. Thanks :+1:

allows to import the same :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file several times while having made
some changes in between two imports. Odoo will take care of creating or modifying each record
depending if it is new or not.

This feature allows a company to use the Import/Export tool in Odoo to modify a batch of records in
a spreadsheet application.

What happens if a value is not provided for a specific field?
-------------------------------------------------------------

If all fields are not set in the CSV file, Odoo will assign the default value for every non-defined
fields. But if fields are set with empty values in the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file,
Odoo will set the EMPTY value in the field, instead of assigning the default value.

How to export/import different tables from an SQL application to Odoo?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

If data needs to be imported from different tables, relations will need to be recreated between
records belonging to different tables. (e.g. if companies and persons are imported, the link between
each person and the company they work for will need to be recreated).

> To manage relations between tables, use the `External ID` facilities of Odoo. The  `External

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage relations between tables, use the `External ID` facilities of Odoo. The `External
```

ID` of a record is the unique identifier of this record in another application. The `External ID`
must be unique across all records of all objects. It is a good practice to prefix this `External ID`
with the name of the application or table. (like 'company_1', 'person_1' instead of '1')

As an example, suppose there is a SQL database with two tables that are to be imported: companies
and persons. Each person belongs to one company, so the link between a person and the company they
work for need to be recreated.

Test this example, here is a :download:`dump of such a PostgreSQL database

> <export_import_data/database_import_test.sql>`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<export_import_data/database_import_test.sql>`
```

- ABC 32.000,00
- $ (32.000,00)

> .. important::
>    A :guilabel:`() (parenthesis)` around the number indicates that the number is a negative value.
>    The currency symbol must be placed within the parenthesis for Odoo to recognize it as a negative
>    currency value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. important::
   A :guilabel:`() (parenthesis)` around the number indicates that the number is a negative value.
   The currency symbol **must** be placed within the parenthesis for Odoo to recognize it as a negative
   currency value.
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If a company wants to import a sales order with several order lines, a specific row must be reserved
in the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file for each order line. The first order line will be
imported on the same row as the information relative to order. Any additional lines will need an
additional row that does not have any information in the fields relative to the order.

As an example, here is :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file of some quotations that can be
imported, based on demo data:

- :download:`File for some Quotations
  <export_import_data/purchase.order_functional_error_line_cant_adpat.csv>`.

The following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file shows how to import purchase orders with
their respective purchase order lines:

- :download:`Purchase orders with their respective purchase order lines
  <export_import_data/o2m_purchase_order_lines.csv>`.

The following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file shows how to import customers and their
respective contacts:

- :download:`Customers and their respective contacts
  <export_import_data/o2m_customers_contacts.csv>`.

> Can the same record be imported several times?

Reviewer 2: same note as above

----------------------------------------------

> If a file is imported that contains one of the columns: `External ID` or `Database ID`, records that
> have already been imported will be modified instead of being created. This is extremely useful as it
> allows to import the same :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file several times while having made
> some changes in between two imports. Odoo will take care of creating or modifying each record
> depending if it is new or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an imported file contains one of the columns: :guilabel:`External ID` or :guilabel:`Database ID`,
records that have already been imported are modified, instead of being created. This is extremely
useful as it allows users to import the same :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file several
times, while having made some changes in between two imports. 

Odoo takes care of creating or modifying each record, depending if it is new or not.
```

> This feature allows a company to use the Import/Export tool in Odoo to modify a batch of records in

Reviewer 2: should the Import/Export tool have a GUI on it?

a spreadsheet application.

What happens if a value is not provided for a specific field?
-------------------------------------------------------------

> If all fields are not set in the CSV file, Odoo will assign the default value for every non-defined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If all fields are not set in the CSV file, Odoo assigns the default value for every non-defined
```

> fields. But if fields are set with empty values in the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
field. But, if fields are set with empty values in the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file,
```

> Odoo will set the EMPTY value in the field, instead of assigning the default value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Odoo sets the empty value in the field, instead of assigning the default value.
```

> How to export/import different tables from an SQL application to Odoo?

Reviewer 2: same note as above

----------------------------------------------------------------------

> If data needs to be imported from different tables, relations will need to be recreated between
> records belonging to different tables. (e.g. if companies and persons are imported, the link between
> each person and the company they work for will need to be recreated).
> 
> To manage relations between tables, use the `External ID` facilities of Odoo. The `External ID` of a
> record is the unique identifier of this record in another application. The `External ID` must be
> unique across all records of all objects. It is a good practice to prefix this `External ID` with
> the name of the application or table. (like 'company_1', 'person_1' instead of '1')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If data needs to be imported from different tables, relations need to be recreated between records
belonging to different tables. For instance, if companies and persons are imported, the link between
each person and the company they work for needs to be recreated.

To manage relations between tables, use the `External ID` facilities of Odoo. The `External ID` of a
record is the unique identifier of this record in another application. The `External ID` must be
unique across all records of all objects. It is a good practice to prefix this `External ID` with
the name of the application or table. (like, 'company_1', 'person_1' - instead of '1')
```

> As an example, suppose there is a SQL database with two tables that are to be imported: companies
> and persons. Each person belongs to one company, so the link between a person and the company they
> work for need to be recreated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, suppose there is an SQL database with two tables that are to be imported: companies
and people. Each person belongs to one company, so the link between a person and the company they
work for must be recreated.
```

> Test this example, here is a :download:`dump of such a PostgreSQL database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test this example, here is a :download:`sample of such a PostgreSQL database
```

<export_import_data/database_import_test.sql>`

> First, export all companies and their "External ID". In PSQL, write the following command:

Reviewer 2: is there a reason "External ID" is in quotes?

.. code-block:: sh

   > copy (select 'company_'||id as "External ID",company_name as "Name",'True' as "Is a Company" from companies) TO '/tmp/company.csv' with CSV HEADER;

> This SQL command will create the following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This SQL command creates the following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file:
```

   person_3,Eric,False,company_2
   person_4,Ramsy,False,company_3

As can be seen in this file, Fabien and Laurence are working for the Bigees company (company_1) and
Eric is working for the Organi company. The relation between persons and companies is done using the
`External ID` of the companies. The `External ID` is prefixed by the name of the table to avoid a
conflict of ID between persons and companies (person_1 and company_1 who shared the same ID 1 in the
original database).

The two files produced are ready to be imported in Odoo without any modifications. After having

> imported these two :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` files, there are 4 contacts and 3 companies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
imported these two :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` files, there are four contacts and three companies
```

> (the firsts two contacts are linked to the first company). Keep in mind to first import the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(the first two contacts are linked to the first company). Keep in mind to first import the
```

companies and then the persons.

How to adapt an import template
===============================

Import templates are provided in the import tool of the most common data to import (contacts,
products, bank statements, etc.). Open them with any spreadsheet software (Microsoft Office,
OpenOffice, Google Drive, etc.).

How to customize file
=====================

* Remove columns that are not needed. Odoo advises not removing the **ID** column (see why below).
* Set a unique ID to every single record by dragging down the ID sequencing.

  .. image:: export_import_data/dragdown.gif
     :align: center

>      :alt: Animation of a spreadsheet application automatically populating a colum in the ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     :alt: Animation of a spreadsheet application automatically populating a column in the ID.
```

   company_2,Organi,True
   company_3,Boum,True

> To create the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file for persons, linked to companies, use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create the :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file for people, linked to companies, use the
```

following SQL command in PSQL:

.. code-block:: sh

    > copy (select 'person_'||id as "External ID",person_name as "Name",'False' as "Is a Company",'company_'||company_id as "Related Company/External ID" from persons) TO '/tmp/person.csv' with CSV

> It will produce the following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It produces the following :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` file:
```

original database).

The two files produced are ready to be imported in Odoo without any modifications. After having
imported these two :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` files, there are four contacts and three
companies (the first two contacts are linked to the first company). Keep in mind to first import
the companies and then the persons.

How to adapt an import template
===============================

Import templates are provided in the import tool of the most common data to import (contacts,
products, bank statements, etc.). Open them with any spreadsheet software (Microsoft Office,
OpenOffice, Google Drive, etc.).

How to customize file
=====================

* Remove columns that are not needed. Odoo advises not removing the :guilabel:`External ID` (ID)
  column (see why below).
* Set a unique ID to every single record by dragging down the ID sequencing.

  .. image:: export_import_data/dragdown.gif
     :align: center
     :alt: Animation of a spreadsheet application automatically populating a column in the ID.

* When adding a new column, Odoo might not map it automatically if its label does not match any
  field in the system.

>   If so, find the corresponding field using the search.

Reviewer: Early line break or missing blank line (depending on how you want this to format)

   person_3,Eric,False,company_2
   person_4,Ramsy,False,company_3

As can be seen in this file, Fabien and Laurence are working for the Bigees company (company_1) and

> Eric is working for the Organi company. The relation between persons and companies is done using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eric is working for the Organi company. The relation between people and companies is done using the
```

`External ID` of the companies. The `External ID` is prefixed by the name of the table to avoid a
conflict of ID between persons and companies (person_1 and company_1 who shared the same ID 1 in the
original database).

The two files produced are ready to be imported in Odoo without any modifications. After having
imported these two :abbr:`CSV (Comma-separated Values)` files, there are four contacts and three
companies (the first two contacts are linked to the first company). Keep in mind to first import

> the companies and then the persons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the companies, and then the people.
```

> How to adapt an import template

Reviewer 2: same note as above

===============================

Import templates are provided in the import tool of the most common data to import (contacts,
products, bank statements, etc.). Open them with any spreadsheet software (Microsoft Office,
OpenOffice, Google Drive, etc.).

> How to customize file

Reviewer 2: same note as above

=====================

* Remove columns that are not needed. Odoo advises not removing the :guilabel:`External ID` (ID)
  column (see why below).
* Set a unique ID to every single record by dragging down the ID sequencing.

  .. image:: export_import_data/dragdown.gif
     :align: center
     :alt: Animation of a spreadsheet application automatically populating a column in the ID.

* When adding a new column, Odoo might not map it automatically if its label does not match any
  field in the system. If so, find the corresponding field using the search.

    .. image:: export_import_data/field_list.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Searching for the field in the drop-down menu of the import page.

  Then, use the label found in the import template to make it work right away the next time the
  import is attempted.

> Why an “ID” column

Reviewer 2: rework this title, as well, please

==================

> The :guilabel:`ID` (External ID) is an unique identifier for the line item. Feel free to use one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :guilabel:`ID` (External ID) is a unique identifier for the line item. Feel free to use one
```

from previous software to facilitate the transition to Odoo.

> Setting an ID is not mandatory when importing but it helps in many cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting an ID is not mandatory when importing, but it helps in many cases:
```

* Update imports: import the same file several times without creating duplicates;

> * Import relation fields (see below).

Reviewer 2: instead of *, I think this would be better utilized as an admonition

Author: Changed to bullet points, removed asterisk

> How to import relation fields

Reviewer 2: same note as above

=============================

An Odoo object is always related to many other objects (e.g. a product is linked to product
categories, attributes, vendors, etc.). To import those relations, the records of the related object
need to be imported first, from their own list menu.

> This can be achieved by using either the name of the related record or its ID, depending on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by using either the name of the related record, or its ID, depending on the
```

circumstances. The ID is expected when two records have the same name. In such a case add ` / ID`

> at the end of the column title (e.g. for product attributes: Product Attributes / Attribute / ID).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
at the end of the column title (e.g. for product attributes: `Product Attributes / Attribute / ID`).
```
